# 1. Tagging and Releases
## 1.1.Tagging and Releases with GitHub Actions
Tagging and creating releases are essential concepts in version control systems, 
particularly when working with GitHub repositories. In version control, 
tagging refers to assigning a unique identifier to a specific point in the project's history, 
typically to mark significant milestones or releases. On the other hand, creating a release on 
GitHub involves packaging a specific version of your project's source code and associated assets, 
such as binaries or documentation, into a cohesive release package. These two concepts are closely 
related, as tagging provides a convenient way to label specific commits and then utilize those tags 
to create well-defined releases on GitHub. In this section, we will delve into tagging and creating 
releases.

To implement the tagging process described, we can add an extra step named "add_tag" under the "jobs" 
section in our GitHub Action. This step will create a tag and a release under specific 
conditions. 

All the conditions that needs to be satisfied for creating a tag and a release are as follows:
- The **"build" job MUST have succeeded**.
- The **pull request IS targeted at the main/master** branch and that the event triggering the 
 pipeline **IS a MERGE pull request**.
  - This is important as we do not want to create a tag and a release for every pull request that is created.
- The pull request **title starts with "RELEASES:"** and the pull request **has a label named "RELEASES"**.
  - Not all pull requests are meant to be releases, so we need to make sure that the pull request is 
  meant to be a release.  We do this by checking that the pull request title and label.
    

Here's an example of how this can be achieved:

The first thing we need to do is to expand the "on" section of our GitHub Action to 
include the "pull_request" event.  This will allow us to trigger the pipeline when a merge pull 
request is created. We do this by specifying the types of pull request events that we want to 
trigger the pipeline. (We are interrestes in the "closed", but also need to include the 
"opened", "synchronize", and "reopened" events as well so that we don't prevent the action from 
running for other scenarios.)

**C# change required to add Types to the PullRequestEvent**
```csharp
var githubPipeline = new GithubPipeline
{
    Name = ".Net",

    OnEvents = new Events
    {
        Push = new PushEvent
        {
            Branches = new string[] { "master" }
        },

        PullRequest = new PullRequestEvent
        {
            Types = new string[] { "opened", "synchronize", "reopened", "closed" },
            Branches = new string[] { "master" }
        }
    },

    ... 
}
```

**yaml output for the above code**
```yaml
on:
  push:
    branches:
    - master
  pull_request:
    types:
    - opened
    - synchronize
    - reopened
    - closed
    branches:
    - master
```

Next we will add the "add_tag" job below the existing "build" job with this bit of code:

```csharp
var githubPipeline = new GithubPipeline
{
    . . .

    Jobs = new Jobs
    {
        Build = new BuildJob
        {
            . . .
            }
        },
        AddTag = new TagJob
        {
            RunsOn = BuildMachines.UbuntuLatest,

            Needs = new string[] { "build" },

            If =
                "needs.build.result == 'success' &&\r"
                + "github.event.pull_request.merged &&\r"
                + "github.event.pull_request.base.ref == 'master' &&\r"
                + "startsWith(github.event.pull_request.title, 'RELEASES:') &&\r"
                + "contains(github.event.pull_request.labels.*.name, 'RELEASES')",

            Steps = new List<GithubTask>
            {
                new CheckoutTaskV3
                {
                    Name = "Checkout code"
                },

                new ShellScriptTask
                {
                    Name = "Extract Version Number and Release Notes",
                    Id = "extract_version",
                    Run =
                        "echo \"version_number=$(grep -oP '(?<=<Version>)[^<]+' ADotNet/ADotNet.csproj)\" >> $GITHUB_OUTPUT\r"
                        + "package_release_notes=$(awk -v RS='' -F'</?PackageReleaseNotes>' 'NF>1{print $2}' BuildTestApp/BuildTestApp.csproj | sed -e 's/^[[:space:]]*//')\r"
                        + "echo 'package_release_notes<<EOF' >> $GITHUB_ENV\r"
                        + "echo -e \"$package_release_notes\" >> $GITHUB_ENV\r"
                        + "echo 'EOF' >> $GITHUB_ENV"
                },

                new ShellScriptTask
                {
                    Name = "Print Extract Version Number and Release Notes",
                    Run =
                        "echo \"Version number - v${{ steps.extract_version.outputs.version_number }}\"\r"
                        + "echo \"Release Notes - ${{ env.package_release_notes }}\""
                },

                new ShellScriptTask
                {
                    Name = "Configure Git",
                    Run =
                        "git config user.name \"GitHub Action\"\r"
                        + "git config user.email \"action@github.com\""
                },

                new CheckoutTaskV3
                {
                    Name = "Authenticate with GitHub",
                    With = new Dictionary<string, string>
                    {
                        { "token", "${{ secrets.PAT_FOR_TAGGING }}" }
                    }
                },

                new ShellScriptTask
                {
                    Name = "Add Release Tag",
                    Run =
                        "git tag -a \"v${{ steps.extract_version.outputs.version_number }}\" -m \"Release - v${{ steps.extract_version.outputs.version_number }}\"\r"
                        + "git push origin --tags"
                },

                new ReleaseTaskV1
                {
                    Name = "Create Release",
                    Uses = "actions/create-release@v1",

                    EnvironmentVariables = new Dictionary<string, string>
                    {
                        { "GITHUB_TOKEN", "${{ secrets.PAT_FOR_TAGGING }}" }
                    },

                    With = new Dictionary<string, string>
                    {
                        { "tag_name", "v${{ steps.extract_version.outputs.version_number }}" },
                        { "release_name", "Release - v${{ steps.extract_version.outputs.version_number }}" },

                        { "body",
                            "## Release - v${{ steps.extract_version.outputs.version_number }}\r"
                            + "\r"
                            + "### Release Notes\r"
                            + "${{ env.package_release_notes }}"
                        },
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
};
```

 
**yaml output for the above code**
```yaml
jobs:
  build:
    # ... your existing build job

  add_tag:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    needs:
      - build
    if: >-
      needs.build.result == 'success' &&
      github.event.pull_request.merged &&
      github.event.pull_request.base.ref == 'master' &&
      startsWith(github.event.pull_request.title, 'RELEASES:') &&
      contains(github.event.pull_request.labels.*.name, 'RELEASES')
    steps:
      - name: Checkout code
        uses: actions/checkout@v3
      - name: Extract Version Number and Release Notes
        id: extract_version
        run: |
          echo "version_number=$(grep -oP '(?<=<Version>)[^<]+' ADotNet/ADotNet.csproj)" >> $GITHUB_ENV
          echo "package_release_notes=$(grep -oP '(?<=<PackageReleaseNotes>)[^<]+' ADotNet/ADotNet.csproj)" >> $GITHUB_ENV
      - name: Print Version Number and Release Notes
        run: |
          echo "Version number - v${{ steps.extract_version.outputs.version_number }}"
          echo "Release Notes - ${{ steps.extract_version.outputs.package_release_notes }}"
      - name: Configure Git
        run: |
          git config user.name "GitHub Action"
          git config user.email "action@github.com"
      - name: Authenticate with GitHub
        uses: actions/checkout@v3
        with:
          token: ${{ secrets.PAT_FOR_TAGGING }}
      - name: Add Release Tag
        run: |
          git tag -a "v${{ steps.extract_version.outputs.version_number }}" -m "Release - v${{ steps.extract_version.outputs.version_number }}"
          git push origin --tags
      - name: Create Release
        uses: actions/create-release@v1
        with:
          tag_name: v${{ steps.extract_version.outputs.version_number }}
          release_name: Release - v${{ steps.extract_version.outputs.version_number }}
          body: >-
            ### Release - v${{ steps.extract_version.outputs.version_number }}

            #### Release Notes

            ${{ steps.extract_version.outputs.package_release_notes }}

```

Let's have a look at the "add_tag" job and break it down into its individual steps:

1. **needs: build**: This indicates that the "add_tag" job depends on the presence of the "build" job and that it will run after that job.

2. **if:** This conditional expression determines whether the job should be executed based on certain conditions:

    - **needs.build.result == 'success'**: Ensures that the "build" job has a successful result.
    
    - **github.event.pull_request.merged**: Checks if the event triggering the pipeline is a merged pull request.
    
    - **github.event.pull_request.base.ref == 'master'**: Verifies that the pull request is targeted at the master branch.
    
    - **startsWith(github.event.pull_request.title, 'RELEASES:')**: Checks if the pull request title starts with "RELEASES:".
    
    - **contains(github.event.pull_request.labels.*.name, 'RELEASES')**: Ensures that the pull request has a label named "RELEASES".

3. **steps**: This section contains a series of steps that will be executed if the conditions in the if statement are met

    - **Checkout code**: Checks out the repository code using the actions/checkout action.

    - **Extract Version Number and Release Notes**: Uses shell commands to extract the version number and package release notes from the ADotNet.csproj file. 
    The extracted values are stored in environment variables using the >> $GITHUB_ENV syntax.

    - **Print Version Number and Release Notes**: Prints the extracted version number and release notes to the console for verification.

    - **Configure Git**: Sets the Git configuration with a user name and email.

    - **Authenticate with GitHub**: Authenticates the action with GitHub using the provided token. 
    
        **IMPORTANT** - See the steps for creating this token at the end of this article as you will need to setup a fine-grained access token and create a repository secret named `PAT_FOR_TAGGING`.

    - **Add Release Tag**: Creates a Git tag with the extracted version number, annotating it with a message indicating the release version. The tag is then pushed to the remote repository.

    - **Create Release**: Uses the actions/create-release action to create a release on GitHub. It sets the tag name, release name, and body of the release. The version number and release notes are populated dynamically using the outputs from the "Extract Version Number" step.


See our next example for how to use the tag and release created by this job to publish a NuGet package.

## 1.2. Creating a fine-grained personal access token

To create a fine-grained personal access token on GitHub, you can follow these steps:

1. **Log in to GitHub**: Visit the GitHub website and log in to your account using your credentials.

2. **Access your account settings**: Once logged in, click on your profile picture icon in the top-right corner of 
the page to open a dropdown menu. From the menu, select "Settings."

3. **Navigate to the Developer settings**: In the left sidebar of the settings page, scroll down and click on "Developer settings."

4. **Select Personal access tokens**: Under the Developer settings, click on "Fine-grained tokens" to manage your access tokens.

5. **Generate a new token**: On the Fine-grained personal access tokens, click on the "Generate new token" button.

6. **Provide a token name**: Give your token a descriptive name to help you identify its purpose later. For example, 
you could use a name like "Fine-grained Token for ADotNet - Tagging"

7. **Set expiration **: You have the option to set an expiration for the token. The default is 30 days. We will change 
the date to 1 year from now (maximum time for fine-grained tokens), so we don't have to renew the tokens that often.
 
8. **Provide a token description (optional)**: Give your token a description to help you identify its purpose later 
if you need more details than already provided in the name."

9. **Resource owner**: GitHub allows you to specify the owner for the token.  You will be the default, but you have 
the option to use an organisation instead.

10. **Configure repository access**: GitHub allows you to select specific repositories for the token. 
You can choose to grant access to all repositories, select individual repositories, or select repositories by organisation. 
(ONLY GRANT YOUR TOKENS THE MINIMUM ACCESS IT NEEDS.  IT IS BETTER TO CREATE SEPERATE TOKENS FOR EACH REPOSITORY)

11. **Configure token permissions**: GitHub allows you to select specific permissions for the token, which define its 
capabilities and access levels. Enable or disable the desired scopes based on the fine-grained permissions you require. 
Scopes can include read, write, delete, and other specific permissions for repositories, issues, pull requests, actions, and more.
For tagging we only require the following permissions:
    - Repository permissions:
      - Contents: Read & write
      - Metadata: Read-only
(DO NOT GRANT MORE PERMISSIONS THAN YOU NEED)

12. **Generate the token**: Once the configuration options has been set for the token, click on the "Generate token" button.

13. **Copy and store the token securely**: Once the token is generated, GitHub will display it on the screen. Make sure to 
copy the token and store it securely in a safe location. Be cautious not to share the token with others, 
as it provides access to your account.

14. **Navigate to your repository**: On the GitHub website, go to the main page of the repository where you want to store the token.

15. **Access repository settings**: Click on the "Settings" tab located near the top-right corner of the repository page.

16. **Go to Secrets**: In the left sidebar of the settings page, click on "Secrets" to manage the repository's secrets.

17. **Create a new secret**: Under the Secrets tab, click on the "New repository secret" button.

18. **Provide a secret name**: Enter a name for your secret. It is recommended to use a descriptive name that reflects 
the purpose of the token. For example, you could use a name like `PERSONAL_ACCESS_TOKEN_TAGGING` or `FINE_GRAINED_TOKEN_TAGGING`

19. **Add the token value**: Paste the fine-grained access token you generated earlier into the "Value" field.

20. **Save the secret**: Click on the "Add secret" or "Save" button to store the secret in your repository.

21. **Access the secret in your workflow**: To use the stored secret in your GitHub Actions workflow or other scripts, 
you can refer to it using the secrets context. For example, you can access the token value with `secrets.PERSONAL_ACCESS_TOKEN` 
if you named your secret `PERSONAL_ACCESS_TOKEN`.

By storing the token as a secret, you can securely access it within your repository's workflows without exposing sensitive information. 
It is important to note that secrets are encrypted and cannot be viewed directly by anyone, including repository collaborators. 
They can only be accessed programmatically within the context of a workflow or action.

That's it! Remember to follow best practices for managing secrets, such as restricting access to the repository, 
regularly reviewing and rotating tokens, and minimizing the scope of permissions granted to the token.
